Java EE Quickstart article for webapp login (#8099)
auth0/docs: articles/quickstart/webapp/java-ee/_includes/_login.md

> ## Configure Java EE Security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure Java EE security
```

Sentence case for all H2 and smaller

Author: In this case `Java EE Security` refers to a specific named feature (I think the grammatical term is proper noun?) so I believe "security" should be capitalized.

Reviewer: Gotcha; then let's leave be.

The Java EE 8 Security API introduced the `HttpAuthenticationMechanism` interface to enable applications to obtain a user's credentials. Default implementations exist for Basic and form-based authentication, and it provides an easy way to configure a custom authentication strategy.

> To authenticate users with Auth0, you can provide custom implementations of the following interfaces:

Reviewer: Does the user have to provide all these? It sounds like some of these are optional.

Author: They will typically all need to be implemented, and in the context of this specific quickstart, are all required. How about `To authenticate with Auth0, provide custom implementations of the following interfaces:` (removing `you can`).

Reviewer: Yup, that would've been my exact suggestion

Author: 👍 updated.

> To authenticate users with Auth0, you can implement the `HttpAuthenticationMechanism` interface and some of its collaborators. The key interfaces involved are:

Reviewer 2: Collaborators seems an odd word choice and made me immediately think of human collaborators on a project...

Author: Yeah, that's not what we want readers to think :smile:

How about, "To authenticate users with Auth0, you can provide custom implementations of the following interfaces:"

Author: Updated.

- `HttpAuthenticationMechanism`: Responsible for obtaining an user's credentials and notifying the container of successful (or not) login status ([JavaDoc](https://javaee.github.io/javaee-spec/javadocs/javax/security/enterprise/authentication/mechanism/http/HttpAuthenticationMechanism.html)).
- `IdentityStore`: Responsible for validating the user's credentials ([JavaDoc](https://javaee.github.io/javaee-spec/javadocs/javax/security/enterprise/identitystore/IdentityStore.html)).
- `CallerPrincipal`: Represents the caller principal of the current HTTP request ([JavaDoc](https://javaee.github.io/javaee-spec/javadocs/javax/security/enterprise/CallerPrincipal.html)).
- `Credential`: Represents the credential the caller will use to authenticate ([JavaDoc](https://javaee.github.io/javaee-spec/javadocs/javax/security/enterprise/credential/Credential.html)).

> First, make your Auth0 settings available to the application. Create an `@ApplicationScoped` bean to retrieve the values from the web context and make them available via getters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, make your Auth0 settings available to the application by creating an `@ApplicationScoped` bean to retrieve the values from the web context and make them available via getters:
```

    private String scope;

    @PostConstruct
    public void init() {
        // Get authentication config values from env-entries in web.xml
        try {
            Context env = (Context)new InitialContext().lookup("java:comp/env");

            this.domain = (String) env.lookup("auth0.domain");
            this.clientId = (String) env.lookup("auth0.clientId");
            this.clientSecret = (String) env.lookup("auth0.clientSecret");
            this.scope = (String) env.lookup("auth0.scope");
        } catch (NamingException ne) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Unable to lookup auth0 configuration properties from web.xml", ne);
        }

        if (this.domain == null || this.clientId == null || this.clientSecret == null || this.scope == null) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("domain, clientId, clientSecret, and scope must be set in web.xml");
        }
    }

    public String getDomain() {
         return domain;
    }

    public String getClientId() {
         return clientId;
    }

    public String getClientSecret() {
         return clientSecret;
    }

    public String getScope() {
        return scope;
    }
}
```

> Next, create a custom `CallerPrincipal` that represents the caller of the current request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create a custom `CallerPrincipal` that represents the caller of the current request:
```

```java
// src/main/java/com/auth0/example/security/Auth0JwtPrincipal.java

public class Auth0JwtPrincipal extends CallerPrincipal {
    private final DecodedJWT idToken;

    Auth0JwtPrincipal(DecodedJWT idToken) {
        super(idToken.getClaim("name").asString());
        this.idToken = idToken;
    }

    public DecodedJWT getIdToken() {
        return this.idToken;
    }
}
```

> You can now implement a custom `Credential` that will be used to represent the user's credentials. It will hold information about the principal:

Reviewer: Would it be appropriate to replace principal (the last word) with `callerPrinciple` to be clearer?

Author: I don't think so in this case, since text in an inline code block would indicate a specific field/class/etc. For Java developers, the concept of a principal is fairly well-understood and frequently used.

Reviewer: Sounds good -- let's leave it

class Auth0JwtCredential implements Credential {
    private Auth0JwtPrincipal auth0JwtPrincipal;

    Auth0JwtCredential(String token) {
        DecodedJWT decodedJWT = JWT.decode(token);
        this.auth0JwtPrincipal = new Auth0JwtPrincipal(decodedJWT);
    }

    Auth0JwtPrincipal getAuth0JwtPrincipal() {
        return auth0JwtPrincipal;
    }
}
```

You now have defined the classes that represent a calling principal and credential. Next, create a custom implementation of `IdentityStore`. This class will be responsible for validating the user's credentials:

```java
// src/main/java/com/auth0/example/security/Auth0JwtIdentityStore.java

@ApplicationScoped
public class Auth0JwtIdentityStore implements IdentityStore {

    @Override
    public CredentialValidationResult validate(final Credential credential) {
        CredentialValidationResult result = CredentialValidationResult.NOT_VALIDATED_RESULT;
        if (credential instanceof Auth0JwtCredential) {
            Auth0JwtCredential auth0JwtCredential = (Auth0JwtCredential) credential;
            result = new CredentialValidationResult(auth0JwtCredential.getAuth0JwtPrincipal());
        }
        return result;
    }
}
```

> If the `credential` is an `Auth0Credential`, the calling user is authenticated and valid, so a `CredentialValidationResult` created with the credential is returned to indicate success. If it is not an `Auth0Credential`, return `CredentialValidationResult.NOT_VALIDATED_RESULT`.

Reviewer: Is the user responsible for setting the code up to create `CredentialValidationResult` and return the credential? If so, maybe rewrite this sentence as:

> If the `credential` is an `Auth0Credential`, the calling user is authenticated and valid. Create `CredentialValidationResult` and return it with the credential to indicate success.

> Before implementing the `HttpAuthenticationMechanism` interface that will use all these collaborators, create a bean that will provide a configured instance of the `AuthenticationController` from the Auth0 Java MVC SDK, used to build the authorize URLs and handle the token exchange to authenticate users:

Reviewer: Maybe something like

```suggestion
Create a bean that will provide a configured instance of the `AuthenticationController` from the Auth0 Java MVC SDK. The bean will be used to build the authorize URLs and handle the token exchange to authenticate users:
```

While reading, it was a bit jarring to see mention to the `HttpAuthenticationMechanism` interface so suddenly.

```java
// src/main/java/com/auth0/example/security/Auth0AuthenticationProvider.java

@ApplicationScoped
public class Auth0AuthenticationProvider {

    @Produces
    public AuthenticationController authenticationController(Auth0AuthenticationConfig config) {
        return AuthenticationController.newBuilder(config.getDomain(), config.getClientId(), config.getClientSecret())
                .build();
    }
}
```

> Finally, implement a custom `HttpAuthenticationMechanism`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, implement a custom `HttpAuthenticationMechanism`  interface that will use all these collaborators
```

I'd also recommend using something more specific instead of `these collaborators` (unless this is something that's immediately obvious to Java devs)

        this.identityStoreHandler = identityStoreHandler;
    }

    @Override
    public AuthenticationStatus validateRequest(HttpServletRequest httpServletRequest,
                                                HttpServletResponse httpServletResponse,
                                                HttpMessageContext httpMessageContext) throws AuthenticationException {

        // Exchange the code for the ID token, and notify container of result.
        if (isCallbackRequest(httpServletRequest)) {
            try {
                Tokens tokens = authenticationController.handle(httpServletRequest);
                Auth0JwtCredential auth0JwtCredential = new Auth0JwtCredential(tokens.getIdToken());
                CredentialValidationResult result = identityStoreHandler.validate(auth0JwtCredential);
                return httpMessageContext.notifyContainerAboutLogin(result);
            } catch (IdentityVerificationException e) {
                return httpMessageContext.responseUnauthorized();
            }
        }
        return httpMessageContext.doNothing();
    }

    private boolean isCallbackRequest(HttpServletRequest request) {

>         return (request.getRequestURI().equals("/callback") && request.getParameter("code") != null);

Reviewer 3: wrapping `(` `)` could be removed, if desired.

Author: removed.

    }
}
```

> The class overrides the `validateRequest` method, which is called on every request to our application, and is responsible for notifying the container of the authentication status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Auth0AuthenticationMechanism` class overrides the `validateRequest` method, which is called on every request to our application and is responsible for notifying the container of the authentication status.
```

> This sample uses the [Authorization Code Flow](https://auth0.com/docs/flows/concepts/auth-code) to exchange an Authorization Code for a token during the authentication flow. If this request is to the `/callback` endpoint and contains the `code` request parameter, it does a few important things:

Reviewer: I'm struggling a bit to follow the transition from the instructions and code samples above to this section. I don't know if it needs another header, but I think a sentence or two explaining where you're going in the following section would help orient the user

> - Calls the `handle` method of the `AuthenticationController` to exchange the Authorization Code for an ID and access token.

Reviewer 3: Refer to them as separate tokens. 
```suggestion
- Calls the `handle` method of the `AuthenticationController` to exchange the Authorization Code for an ID token and an access token.
```

- Uses the ID token to create a new `Auth0Credential`.
- Calls the `validate` method of the custom `IdentityStore` implementation to obtain the validation result.
- Notifies the application container of the login status.

If the requested resource is not `/callback`, return `httpMessageContext.doNothing()` to allow the request processing to continue. You will see shortly how to use the authentication information when triggering authentication and displaying web views.

Finally, note that the `@AutoApplySession` annotation has been added to allow the container to create a session for the authenticated user.

> ## Trigger Authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Trigger authentication
```

    private final Auth0AuthenticationConfig config;
    private final AuthenticationController authenticationController;

    @Inject
    LoginServlet(Auth0AuthenticationConfig config, AuthenticationController authenticationController) {
        this.config = config;
        this.authenticationController = authenticationController;
    }

    @Override
    public void doGet(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {
        // URL where the application will receive the authorization code (e.g., http://localhost:3000/callback)
        String callbackUrl = String.format(
                "%s://%s:%s/callback",
                request.getScheme(),
                request.getServerName(),
                request.getServerPort()
        );

        // Create the authorization URL to redirect the user to, to begin the authentication flow.
        String authURL = authenticationController.buildAuthorizeUrl(request, callbackUrl)
                .withAudience("https://" + config.getDomain() + "/userinfo")
                .withScope(config.getScope())
                .build();

        response.sendRedirect(authURL);
    }
}
```

> The `LoginController` is responsible for redirecting the request to the proper authorization URL, where the user can authenticate with Auth0. It uses the `AuthenticationController` from the Auth0 Java MVC SDK to build the correct authorization URL, using the configuration values injected via `Auth0AuthenticationConfig`. By default, this sample requests the `"openid profile email"` scopes, to allow the application to retrieve basic profile information from the authenticated user. You can read more about these scopes in the [OpenID Connect Scopes](https://auth0.com/docs/scopes/current/oidc-scopes) documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `LoginController` is responsible for redirecting the request to the proper authorization URL, where the user can authenticate with Auth0. It uses the `AuthenticationController` from the Auth0 Java MVC SDK to build the correct authorization URL. This uses the configuration values injected via `Auth0AuthenticationConfig`. By default, the sample requests the `"openid profile email"` scopes to allow the application to retrieve basic profile information from the authenticated user. You can read more about these scopes in the [OpenID Connect Scopes](https://auth0.com/docs/scopes/current/oidc-scopes) documentation.
```

> Once the user has entered their credentials and authorized the requested permissions, Auth0 will issue a request to the `callbackUrl`, and include a `code` query parameter which can be exchanged for an ID and access token. Recall that the `Auth0HttpAuthenticationMechanism` created above handles this exchange so that it can notify the application container of authentication status. This allows the Servlet that handles requests to the `/callback` path to simply forward the request on to the originally requested resource prior to logging in, or simply redirect to the home page:

Reviewer 3: Refer to them as separate tokens. 
```suggestion
Once the user has entered their credentials and authorized the requested permissions, Auth0 will issue a request to the `callbackUrl`, and include a `code` query parameter which can be exchanged for an ID token and an access token. Recall that the `Auth0HttpAuthenticationMechanism` created above handles this exchange so that it can notify the application container of authentication status. This allows the Servlet that handles requests to the `/callback` path to simply forward the request on to the originally requested resource prior to logging in, or simply redirect to the home page:
```

> Once the user has entered their credentials and authorized the requested permissions, Auth0 will issue a request to the `callbackUrl`, and include a `code` query parameter which can be exchanged for an ID token and an access token. Recall that the `Auth0HttpAuthenticationMechanism` created above handles this exchange so that it can notify the application container of authentication status. This allows the Servlet that handles requests to the `/callback` path to simply forward the request on to the originally requested resource prior to logging in, or simply redirect to the home page:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the user has entered their credentials and authorized the requested permissions, Auth0 will issue a request to the `callbackUrl` and include a `code` query parameter which can be exchanged for an ID token and an access token. 

Recall that the `Auth0HttpAuthenticationMechanism` created above handles this exchange so that it can notify the application container of authentication status. This allows the Servlet that handles requests to the `/callback` path to forward the request on to the resource originally requested prior to logging in or redirect to the home page:
```

```java
// src/main/com/auth0/example/web/CallbackServlet.java

@WebServlet(urlPatterns = {"/callback"})
public class CallbackServlet extends HttpServlet {

    @Override
    public void doGet(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response) throws IOException {
        String referer = (String) request.getSession().getAttribute("Referer");
        String redirectTo = referer != null ? referer : "/";

        response.sendRedirect(redirectTo);
    }
}
```

> ## Display User Information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Display user information
```

            request.setAttribute("profile", auth0JwtPrincipal.getIdToken().getClaims());
        }
        request.getRequestDispatcher("/WEB-INF/jsp/home.jsp").forward(request, response);
    }
}
```

You can then use that profile information in your view to display information about the user:

```html
<!-- src/main/webapp/WEB-INF/jsp/fragments/navbar.jspf -->

<c:choose>
    <c:when test="<%= "${empty profile}" %>">
        <li>
            <form action="/login" method="GET">
                <input type="submit" value="Login"/>
            </form>
        </li>
    </c:when>
    <c:otherwise>
        <li>
            <a href="#">
                <!-- Profile image should be set to the profile picture from the id token -->
                <img src="<%= "${profile.get('picture').asString()}" %>" alt="Profile picture"/>
            </a>
            <div>
                <!-- Show the user's full name from the id token here -->
                <div>"<%= "${profile.get('name').asString()}" %>"</div>
                <a href="/profile">Profile</a>
                <a href="/logout">Log out</a>
            </div>
        </li>
    </c:otherwise>
</c:choose>
```

> ## Handle Logout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Handle logout
```

> To log a user out, you should clear the application session and log the user out of Auth0. This is handled in the `LogoutServlet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To log a user out of your application, you should clear the application session and log the user out of Auth0. This is handled in `LogoutServlet`.
```

> First, clear the session by calling `request.getSession().invalidate()`. Then construct the logout URL, being sure to include the `returnTo` query parameter, which is where the user will be redirected to after logging out. Finally, redirect the response to our logout URL:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, clear the session by calling `request.getSession().invalidate()`. Then construct the logout URL, being sure to include the `returnTo` query parameter, which is where the user will be redirected to after logging out. Finally, redirect the response to the application's logout URL:
```

> First, clear the session by calling `request.getSession().invalidate()`. Then construct the logout URL, being sure to include the `returnTo` query parameter, which is where the user will be redirected to after logging out. Finally, redirect the response to the application's logout URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, clear the session by calling `request.getSession().invalidate()`. Then construct the logout URL, being sure to include the `returnTo` query parameter, to which the user will be redirected after logging out. Finally, redirect the response to the application's logout URL:
```

```java
// src/main/java/com/auth0/example/web/LogoutServlet.java

@WebServlet(urlPatterns = "/logout")
public class LogoutServlet extends HttpServlet {
    private final Auth0AuthenticationConfig config;

    @Inject
    LogoutServlet(Auth0AuthenticationConfig config) {
        this.config = config;
    }

    @Override
    protected void doGet(final HttpServletRequest request, final HttpServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {
        clearSession(request);
        response.sendRedirect(getReturnUrl(request));
    }

    private void clearSession(HttpServletRequest request) {
        if (request.getSession() != null) {
            request.getSession().invalidate();
        }
    }

>     private String getReturnUrl(HttpServletRequest request) {

Reviewer 3: can this be renamed? could be confused with the "return to url" required by the logout endpoint. Maybe "getLogoutUrl" ?

Reviewer 3: Probably affects the sample project code as well

Author: renamed as suggested. Will update the sample as well. 👍

Author: update to sample: https://github.com/auth0-samples/auth0-java-ee-sample/pull/13

        String returnUrl = String.format("%s://%s", request.getScheme(), request.getServerName());
        int port = request.getServerPort();
        String scheme = request.getScheme();

        if (("http".equals(scheme) && port != 80) ||
                ("https".equals(scheme) && port != 443)) {
            returnUrl += ":" + port;
        }

        returnUrl += "/";

        // Build logout URL like:
        // https://{YOUR-DOMAIN}/v2/logout?client_id={YOUR-CLIENT-ID}&returnTo=http://localhost:3000/
        String logoutUrl = String.format(
                "https://%s/v2/logout?client_id=%s&returnTo=%s",
                config.getDomain(),
                config.getClientId(),
                returnUrl
        );

        return logoutUrl;
    }
}
```

> ## Run the Sample

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run the sample
```

> To build and run the sample, execute the `wildfly:run` Maven goal to start an embedded WildFly application server with this application deployed to it. See the [WildFly Maven Plugin](https://docs.jboss.org/wildfly/plugins/maven/latest/) documentation for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build and run the sample, execute the `wildfly:run` Maven goal. This starts an embedded WildFly application server with the application deployed to it. See the [WildFly Maven Plugin](https://docs.jboss.org/wildfly/plugins/maven/latest/) documentation for more information.
```
